[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If you look at abundance
as a word and the etymology
of abundance, it comes from
two Latin words-- ab and unda.
And "ab" means from, an "unda"--
U-N-D-A-- means wave.
So you're from the wave.
>> It's a journey for everyone,
the journey to abundance.
And it's very easy
to think that we're
journeying towards something
outside of ourselves
when, in fact, the
journey to abundance
is a journey into ourselves.
Into finding the abundance
that resides within us
and enjoying that abundance.
And then seeing that
abundance ripple out
into the world in unexpected
and amazing and wondrous ways.
>> So I think part of the
thinking is not to say
it's outside of me,
how can I get that?
But how do I already have
that within me, and how
do I ride that wave to more?
>> It's really important in
talking about abundance that we
encompass this area of
understanding the depth
of life, that it
encompasses all areas.
You can't have one lacking
and be truly prosperous.
You really need to work
on all facets of life.
>> So one day, the novelist Kurt
Vonnegut was at a party at some
hedge fund trader's
house in the Hamptons,
this very wealthy
community off New York.
And he was there
with Joseph Heller,
who is another novelist.
And Joseph Heller had had
a best seller, "Catch-22."
And Kurt Vonnegut had
had best sellers, too.
And they're standing
in this living
room that's bigger than both
of their houses combined.
And this is an ultra
wealthy hedge fund trader
that's giving this party there.
And so Vonnegut, sort of kidding
Joseph Heller, he says, Joe.
He says, doesn't
it make you jealous
that this guy,
this hedge trader,
probably makes more in a day
than you made on all your books
combined?
And Joseph Heller says, no way,
it doesn't make me jealous.
He goes, why?
He said, it's gotta, come on.
You're just lying to yourself,
and you're lying to me.
He says, why doesn't
it make you jealous?
He said, because I've got
something he doesn't have.
He says, what could
you possibly have
this guy-- he has everything.
He has all the money to
buy anything he wants.
He has the coolest
cars, a big house.
He has this private helicopter
that jets him out here.
What could you possibly
have that he doesn't have?
He says, I know the
meaning of enough.
>> All we have at the end of
the game isn't how much money we
made.
It's who do we become.
Did my life matter?
Did my life have purpose?
Did I use that gift
that I was given
called life by
whatever you believe
gave you that gift called life?
Did I use it in a way that
I'm happy, that I'm proud,
that I feel fulfilled?
>> You've got to be
very cautious of letting
your material things own you.
And that's what I see.
A lot of people let their
possessions own them,
and they lose themselves
in their possessions.
And that's not prosperity.
>> Whereas abundance,
when I think of abundance,
I think of a forest.
I think of it like an
ecosystem, where not only
is it OK for me to
be different to you.
Where not only is it OK
for me not to conform.
It's necessary.
Every ecosystem has diversity.
Every ecosystem
thrives on differences,
and it's inherently
creative, and yet
cooperative and interdependent.
And it allows for growth,
and allows for freedom.
That's what I see as abundance.
>> I think that you have to
find out what your definition
of abundance is.
Mine is spaciousness.
When I feel I have spaciousness
in my life in all those areas--
in energy, in money, in time,
in pursuing what I want,
in relationships--
that spaciousness is
a really big thing.
>> I'm just a person.
Everybody's just a person.
We're all just doing our best.
And there's no reason why
I can't be abundant as you,
why you can't be abundant as me.
There's nothing really
separating us other
than our perceptions
of separation.
We can all access
extraordinary abundance
just because it exists.
Look around you.
Look at the world.
Look at the sun, pumping
out energy constantly.
Look at the world.
Plants growing, the sea
moving, the planets orbiting.
Galaxies spinning.
You know?
We're constantly in growth and
motion and perpetual abundance.
So we can have it just
because it exists.
And we're part of this creation.
We don't have to
be extraordinary.
We don't do more than we are.
We just have to be here.
We just have to be present,
and be able to receive it
into our lives.
>> It's up to you.
You have the ability to do it.
You have the genius
inside of you.
>> What life experiences does
your soul yearn for if there
was no obstacles to money?
If you can remove the money
question out of your mind,
what would your soul
thrive to live in?
Who would you love to touch?
Who would you love to serve?
What would you
like to experience?
Taste?
Eat?
What would you like to wear?
How would you like to travel?
Where would you
like to travel to?
What people is your
soul yearning to meet?
What places in the world are
you feeling drawn and called to?
>> There are two things that
drive us past our current
limitations.
Hope and dreams.
And it's the belief
that there is more.
The belief that this
isn't all there is.
The belief that I can exceed
my current limitations.
And without that vision, without
that dream, without that hope,
we stay stuck.
We stay where we are because
anything else is too fearful.
It's that that lets us
step past that threshold
into that new area and
experience something.
Face the fear.
Move through the fear.
Recognize, OK, this is going
to be a little bit scary,
but there is a
dream beyond that.
And so it's looking
at the dream.
It's focusing on the dream.
It's attaching your life,
your actions, your thinking,
to the hope as
opposed to the fear
that lets us step past
that space and experience
something else.
>> And if you think about action
from the point of view that
maybe you wake up in the morning
and you think the goal is
to get butterflies.
So what you might do
is go out and say,
well, I see some people
are catching butterflies
with a butterfly net.
So the scarcity model
is a model in which
you go out with a butterfly
net to chase butterflies,
and the goal is
that you're going
to get a bigger and better
net on a day-by-day basis
to catch more butterflies.
But there's a problem
with that model.
And the problem is, no
matter how many butterflies
you get, the next
day when you wake up,
you've got to chase again.
And if you stop chasing,
all those butterflies,
they disappear.
Whereas you'll
also notice there's
a different type of
person who doesn't even
bother about the net.
What they're doing instead
is they're growing garden.
And if you grow a
garden, well, you're
not trying to chase
the butterflies.
But you make it
beautiful with flowers.
You've got amazing plants.
You've got an
amazing place which
actually attracts the birds and
the bees and the butterflies.
Then, every day, the
butterflies come to you
without you having
to chase anything.
>> So my sense of having
an abundant life is having
freedom.
The freedom of being,
freedom of choice.
I used to write in my daily
planner that what I wanted
was to have enough
income to have choice
about what I did with my time.
And I think we've
gotten to that place,
and I think that's
the real freedom.
But even if we didn't have
all the finances we needed,
I think the mindset is to
live the abundant life.
And it's not always
about material wealth.
It's also about wealth
of relationships.
The wealth of experience
that you have.
For me, it was
having my thinking
opening up so there's all
kinds of new possibilities.
So what that does is keeps
life fresh and exciting.
>> I have a friend who's
a writer and a therapist.
And he told me this story
that I thought was so great.
He was in Hollywood
for a long time,
and he was a screenwriter, and
he met all the famous people.
And he doesn't drop names.
But one time he was
telling me this story.
He says, Bill, you know
I don't drop names,
but I'm going to drop one name.
He said, I'm in Park City, Utah
at the Sundance Film Festival.
And Robert Redford was
talking about a script
he may want me to work on.
So we ride back in
his private plane.
And he says, I'm looking around.
He's got a private plane.
He's got a car waiting for
him at the airport where
we're gonna land.
He's got it made.
So he talks to me
about the script,
and it doesn't take very long.
And we decide it's not
really a workable project,
so that's that.
We lapse into silence.
And Robert Redford is
looking out the plane window
and, apropos of
nothing, and says,
you know who's got it made?
My friends says, he's
thinking, you've got it.
But he says, no,
who's got it made?
He says, Paul Newman.
He's got it made.
He says, he has a
wife that loves him.
They've been married
for a long time.
Kids that love him.
I don't have such a
great relationship
with some of my kids.
And divorce.
He's aging.
I'm aging.
But he's aged gracefully into
character parts in films.
He's happy with that.
I still want to play
the leading role.
I'm still fighting for that.
And as I get older, it's
harder to get those roles.
And I'm frustrated with that.
He says, and he's got his
own charity, Newman's Own,
and it contributes millions
of dollars to people.
It's done good all
over the world.
He's fulfilled and happy,
and he lives this great life.
He says, Newman,
he's got it made.
And my friend was
taking, 99% of humanity
would think you've got
it made, Robert Redford.
He said, and that's
when I realized,
no matter where you
are, if you don't have
that sense of abundance, that
you have enough, that you're
OK, you're screwed, basically.
You're not happy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]